[2016.11.17] Post-PLDI Meeting
==============================

-- Examples / discussion specialization implementation strategy:
     -- May be specialized or not:
     F :: a -> Int
     F _ = 
       Let x ::_1 Int = 18 in 
       x


Main decision tree:  Both (A) and (B) below are compatible, which to invest in?  When?

 (A) Push forward linear types proposal all the way through compiler
   - Determine whether the complexity is worth it in GHC
   - Present to community on haskell-cafe

 (B) Quicker hacks regarding temporary generations and the ability to
    reduce a particular expression to WHNF with a GUARANTEE of no GC
    pause.
 
   - This is related to CNF and the `local` proposal, but there’s a
     big design space here!
     
   - Do you want to be able to run these “real time expressions” while
     major GC is running?  If so, you must turn off the ability to
     update thunks on the major heap (or even read it?).

   - RN: you could combine with something like “static” to guarantee
     that you have a top level function with no/limited free vars.  This
     could give you a pure function that can run while major GC is
     happening.

These two strategies can SHARE some implementation goodies in the
compiler backend and RTS!!  (primops, control over alloc, etc)

Related work:

 * Note: “Non-stop Haskell” - ICFP 2000 - Andy Cheadle
   https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/non-stop-haskell/


Discussion: Incremental GC.
---------------------------

 * Many systems are going to it, even by default (OCaml, Racket, Java)
 
 * Reduces the latency problem, but not enough for soft real time
   apps/ low-latency apps.


Question:
--------

The linear heap is disjoint---but it doesn’t have to be malloc/free
though does it?  It could just be a separate heap partition with its
own GC strategy.  If you are interested in THROUGHPUT, this may have
advantages, especially parallel throughput...

On that note... here is a reminder of how bad malloc/free is on simple
functional programs:

    data Tree = Leaf Int | Node Tree Tree
    add1 (Leaf n)   = Leaf (n+1)
    add1 (Node x y) = Node (add1 x) (add1 y)

C with malloc/free is over 2X slower than Java/MLton on “add1”!  If
you like this example, I factored the plots out into this Google Doc
(-RN):   https://docs.google.com/document/d/1p1x4cbClFCrnBmYn2FddfNC2ZgtYTJKwy2XLzPxO1Wg/edit?usp=sharing
Because I expect this notes scratchpad to remain plain-text and get
migrated to the repo.

Mathieu: a series of goals/fallbacks
GOAL: ability to write zero-allocation code
   Plan A: zero allocations
   Plan B: de-allocation is prompt
   Plan C: as now
   
Another related goal: ensure that files are closed



[Ryan] proposed application:
----------------------------

 * Safe low-level initialization of records (linear pointers / session types)

Will talk about this next week.
