

[2017.01.19] {Meeting notes}
----------------------------------------

SPJ: you've said several times that this is NOT the very best design
if your goal is explicit memory management.  So what is?

Arnaud: the fight is between linear types and uniqueness types.
Linear types have a nontrivial syntactic overhead.

Uniqueness types are good at deallocating.  Linear types inform us
about what can be inlined and fused...

Will this claim about predictable optimization be a contribution
bullet?  Need a section that makes that claim and substantiates it.

(SPJ: How would fusion play out with uniqueness types? [The competition.])

--------

A feature of our system is that it doesn't require SYNTACTIC LIFETIMES
(i.e. Rust).

This type system is much more compatible than existing systems in GHC.
[Simon suggests justifying this in related work, late in the paper.]

SPJ: all these advantages are nice secondary features.  But the main
one is that we solve *a problem*.  Keep focus on that.

Arnaud: at Tweag we got a lot of experience with the Vector library.
Extremely easy to break performance of a program with Vector.


 * 

Issue from last time: let_1 vs subscript on DownArrow
-----------------------------------------------------

JP worked on the formalism for a few hours and failed to get
something.  You can write a semantics of that form but the proofs
didn't go through (so far).





Simon notes from hangout
------------------------

NOt necessarily best design for explicit alloc/dealloc of memory
(or file handles)
If not necessarily the best design, why not adopt the best design?
Answer: the "best design" imposes a burden on the programmer (CPS)
So perhpas it is not the best design after all
Claim: using linear types makes the programmer more optimisable?
More predicatable
Demonstrate this claim
Q: what is the problem taht we solve?
A: explicit alloc/dealloc without use-after free errors
Anything else?
Problem: too easy in GHC today for fusion to fail; with linear types Arnaud thinks we can GUARANTEE that fusion happens

Contributions
1. We provide a type system that supports explicit alloc and dealloc, and guaranttes no use-after-free bugs
2. This works in the context of Haskell
3. It supports non-syntactic lifetimes
4. Much more convenitne to use than combinator libraries
   [and more expressive / more general]
5?  Easier and more predictable fusion...

[We want a forward reference to a section each that substantiates these claims.]


Final simon notes from email
----------------------------

Combinator libraries insufficient; either inconvenient or unsafe (use after free).
Arnaud says: “this is not necessarily best design for explicit alloc/dealloc of memory (or file handles)”.  But

· If not “necessarily the best design”, why not simply adopt the best
         design?

· Answer: the "best design" (namely uniqueness types, I think) imposes
         a burden on the programmer (CPS).  So perhaps it is not the
         best design after all?

· Claim: using linear types makes optimisation easier or more
         predictable. .  We need a section that makes and
         substantiates this claim.

· Huge benefit: non-syntactic lifetimes.  Our desired application
     necessarily requires non-syntactic lifetimes (eg Pusher,
     where message blocks are allocated and deallocated in
     non-nested order).  Rust doesn’t support this (need to check
     this claim).

· Claim: our system is much easier to integrate into Haskell or ML
         than competing approaches.  Substantiate this claim in
         related work.

· Problem: too easy in GHC today for fusion to fail; with linear
         types.  Claim: Arnaud thinks we can GUARANTEE that fusion
         happens
