

[2017.01.05] {meeting notes}
----------------------------------------

Six weeks till ICFP.  Forcing function.

What are the contributions for an ICFP paper?  

 * They've been talking about a theorem statement.

 * Implementation artifact -- patching GHC.
  - run a server, change the worst-case latency?
    (e.g. using the FFI for msg queue, no RTS change)
  - 

Simon's questioning the value proposition if the backend isn't
changed.  Instead the argument becomes: making manual memory mgmt
safer.

Do we still need hard numbers?  SPJ: yes, still helpful.
It being a realworld example is most important.

Will the paper say "this is real; it is in GHC"?  That's a nice cherry 
on top if everything else is convincing.

Only type-inference is modified currently, not Core.


Question: I was wondering about how the memcached style motivation
works if you cannot have multiple threads storing a pointer to a
foreign data structure.




Related work:
-------------

Relating to other linear type systems... weights on bindings instead
of types.  Not too many type systems that did this.  First such system
for a lazy language.  Polymorphism on weight is new (for a linear type
system, been done in uniqueness type systems).

Colin Runciman paper in the early 90s was probably the last paper to
look at linear+lazy.

SPJ: The reader may think: having weights on bindings makes it
different, but is it better?  Need to argue that.

(Several claims on this front... simplicity, ease of implementation,
code reuse.)


TODOs:
------

 * a couple experimental results for the introduction

 * start a fresh document in ICFP format

 * what else?



Arnaud's summary:
-----------------

In today's meeting we took the decision to use the ICFP deadline (27
February) as a focus.

The paper will be articulated around the following:

- We have a proposal for a Haskell extension
- Focus on explicit allocation (of arrays, file handles, buffers,
  channels) and memory safety regarding deallocation
- With a formal definition of a core calculus
- Including a dynamic semantics for a lazy language
- A proof of soundness of that semantics
- And examples to demonstrate that the extension is reasonably
  convenient to use in practice

Here are the work items that were discussed:

- Articulate a list of contributions. Some were mentioned today:
  - The challenges we are addressing:
    - Old programs should still work (i.e. can mix linear and
      non-linear easily)
    - Don't duplicate code and types. E.g. still one list type. Avoid
      writing the same function multiple times
    - Simplicity. In comparison Garret Morris ICFP 2016 (The Best of
      Both Worlds: Linear Functional Programming without Compromise)
      is very complicated)
    - Integration into an existing language implementation
  - Unique features of the proposal:
    - Weight on bindings. It's not entirely new, but some differences
      exist with the prior proposals. Polymorphism of weight is new.
    - Semantics of prompt deallocation for lazy languages.
- Start the paper afresh and make a draft by taking the best bits of
  the previous drafts.
- Collect data to compare the GC pauses of garbage collected data
  structures versus out-of-heap data structures, probably using the
  real-world queue example from the draft.
- Regarding soundness: there are two class of bugs that the system is
  supposed to eliminate:
  - Use-after-free bugs. For this we have some proof.
  - Eventual deallocation of resources. This is still an open
    challenge.

Crucially completing the prototype is not a priority: while it is nice
to be able to say that we have a prototype to justify that the
extension we are proposing is indeed reasonably practical on the
implementation side, having a complete implementation is not
necessary.

At this point, the ball is in Tweag and Jean-Philippe's court. We will
work at making the first iteration on the draft. See you all next
Thursday.
